If you look at the embryological origin of the liver, it is made of three parts.
A part called the superior intestine,
a part called the midgut,
and a part called the inferior intestine.
The junction between the
superior intestine
and the midgut here, there will be what we call an aspiration phenomenon, so
a field,
a metabolic field that we call a metabolic field of loosening fields, that means an aspiration
field.
If I take a section here like this and I take here and I see this tissue, I draw them like
this,
we see that it is a set of cells. Below, I have mesodermal interior tissue,
among other things, this will be the entire arterial system of the liver later.
Don't forget that the material system of the liver comes from my essentially vitelline system.
I see at some point that the tissue is as if aspirated, and it makes a movement like this.
This is the same developmental protocol for all glands.
And then at some point, you see that this, you did that.
And it starts to fractalize, if I may say so, and to form more and
more.
And each small budding will create a new aspiration field here.
And that will form a set of small channels, which are called hepatic ducts.
We have two types of glands, an exocrine gland and an endocrine gland.
Here, the liver is an exocrine gland.
Why?
Because if it is an endocrine gland, the system loses its
lumen and secretes its substance into the
blood, endocrine.
Whereas here, it secretes its biliary system inside the lumen.
And so, it sends back here, you see, it sends back into the system here.
All of this, which are all the sugars for digestion, etc.
And there, we go into details.
But it is important to understand that the liver is an aspiration field that will mix
on the mesodermal level with a set of
vitelline vessels that will form this whole process of the
liver.
It's just the intestine that has completely, but in addition, it has combined with mesoderm.
And in addition, since it has combined with mesoderm, it has this function at the same
time.
both mesodermal and endodermal function. The
endodermal function,
it is a digestive type function, a specialized biliary canal type, with
the cycle
enterohepatic which is very important, with this relationship where it will secrete this
bile which will be reabsorbed at the cecal level, you know this cycle, it is an important
cycle. And another function which has an
endocrine function by
my mesodermal system.
So, two types of functions.
And when we remove a part of the liver,
let's say I cut this part,
in fact, it regenerates,
but it regenerates in its
mesodermal structure.
To have an aspiration field,
I need to have a phase of
longitudinal growth of the embryo.
So, its field is an aspiration field
linked to growth.
So, it's a movement
that is linked to both the process of cephalization, cardialization and hepatization.
It must be remembered that the primary function of the liver will initially be essentially hemodynamic.
It will allow a potential for life.
In addition, in its first impulse, it is formed by the products of disassimilation.
This means that its first information is to receive the catabolic products
from the whole body.
And then it will pass.
So, it is made in its structure, almost, to receive
that and therefore be able to participate in regeneration.
This means that in its process, the liver is the main organ
regenerating organ of your body.
As much on a tendinous level, as much on a muscular level, as much on
other small levels of the structure.
One of the anatomical structures that has the most...
power to regenerate you.
This gives a potential and it will receive portal, lymphatic
and cardiac information.
From an osteopathic point of view, one, if it loses its functional integrity
with the diaphragm.
Don't forget that the triangular ligament, the falciform ligament,
this envelope of the liver is in continuity.
tissue, cellular and even molecular with the diaphragm and the
pericardium.
And that it has this origin beyond the precordial plate.
And that we see that there are cells that are beyond the precordial plate here.
It is an undifferentiated mesenchyme at the beginning,
but which will give both the septum transversum
and the pericardium.
and that the septum transversum will, among other things, give what
is called the triangular ligament of the liver
and which continues as the falciform ligament hepatis.
It will also have information for the greater omentum, the greater
omentum.
The heart, the diaphragm and the part of the liver
are connected.
So, that means that here, what is important is that it is a fulcrum that
will indirectly participate in giving later
the diaphragmatic pillars.
I see that the septum transversum is here, we will say, you see, as it is here, with the pericardium.
Well, if we see, if we go back, I have these cells here.
But the system here does not move, and it is the whole system around.
that grows like that, you see, and that's what makes this integration happen
by
the developmental movement of the brain when I actually take the
base here somewhere, I
am on an original fulcrum, you see, this fulcrum, we can say, I
prefer the word a fulcrum,
we will be able to help a liver already by giving good integrity, so
a simple displacement
costal can change the position of my diaphragm and my liver. The
diaphragm is always
what we call the gate of life with regard to its free orifices. This notion which
is
very important for the liver, it is this notion in relation to the diaphragm. The diaphragm,
what does it do? It is a rhythmic movement. We
breathe 23,000 times
a day. This means that in its function,
The liver, in its work, is dependent on the movement
of the lungs, therefore on the diaphragmatic movement.
Here, you know that we have a negative pressure at the pulmonary level and that we have a rather
positive pressure at the abdominal level.
Here, we will find a negative pressure at the pelvic level and at the very top,
we will find another positive congestion.
The normotension.
abdominal, it is an interesting reference for us. This means that the epigastric
tension
is slightly higher than the hypogastric tension. This
is my normotension. If now I have an
abdominal hypertension, very frequent, I increase here and
therefore I lose my strength here. This means
that treating this area will always be...
see my large depressive zone. This means that treating the lungs,
is to re-treat the
peritoneum. If I have a destabilization of one, I lose the other. So
that means that not
only can I work it there, but I must work it in a space of volemia. So
how can we support this whole diaphragmatic process? Don't forget that not only
here you have the liver which is huge, but below here
You have a large part both with the heart here and with the lungs here, in
an important exchange space.
It will be necessary to be able to determine what type of tension you will find in your abdomen.
We work on volemic schemes.
And so, it will be important to support here, because if you lose your function here, you will decrease your
vitality here.
The diaphragm, it will try to hold.
Second thing, it's the qualities regarding the liquids that are exchanged.
A digestive type quality.
for example, or a volume quality
that must happen. So what will the liver do?
It will quantify and it will
modify the portal tension
and that it will transmit to the heart.
The liver is only a specialization of the
duodenum, in fact, which
receives the most information
of autocrine, paracrine,
neurocrine, endocrine type,
that is to say, it is a crossroads
of information, both
for your pancreas, for your liver, for everything you
want, which will give
of digestive type according to what you will receive, so that means that it is a
state
of volume that will be expressed in relation to that by a specific quantity, you see, so
I need to have
a digestive state that is more and more adequate, that means that again
I go back
autocrine, paracrine, digestive, so when the liver stops all its movements, it will lose the
quality of its exchanges also on the lymphatic level, don't forget, and then that can
destabilize your heart, it can make the heart sick. So we can almost say that there is a
very
important relationship between the heart and the liver. If
your liver starts to destabilize, that's
where the heart becomes sick. So if your heart starts to be sick, especially
relieve your
liver. That most of the time, heart conditions are only a metabolic dysfunction
of the liver.
The liver also.
can overload the lymphatic system, which will overload the lymphatic duct system,
which will overload the entire lateral neurological plexus of the sympathetic chain
and which will have distant repercussions.
A left shoulder can be the reflection of hepatic congestion.
These are the first signs of a liver disorder.
The great primary conduit is first on the left.
We must not forget this trinity that the liver and the spleen.
I also add the mesenteric system, its sponges, its
volemic states.
They work together, they support each other as best they can.
Then, don't forget that the axis between the liver and the heart is the superior vena cava.
Which we saw yesterday, how it was built.
We can also talk about this whole immune relationship with the thymic system,
the T lymphocyte, this passage with the thymus and all this return through the spleen.
of plans, of immune information that is done by the liver
and back to the spleen system with the thymic balance
which informs the lymphocytes into T lymphocytes, etc.